# Upgrading from 6.x to 7.x

Due to an extensive refactoring aiming to improve DX, there is many breaking changes in the API... But stay with me, it's mainly function renaming and new arguments. 

## Laravel 8+ and php 8.0+ required

It's not a BC, but still, minimal requirements are now these.

## Type hinting everywhere (part II)

In order to reinforce the API, we decided to use PHP type hinting everywhere. Sharp 6 handled the big part, but with php 8.0 we could add a few that were missing.

## EntityListQueryParams is now an instance property of an EntityList 

This means that the `getListData()` function no longer has a `$params` argument, which must be replaced by `$this->queryParams`. This change makes it much easier to build the EntityList depending on the request (hide some columns for instance). 

## DashboardQueryParams is now an instance property of a Dashboard

Similarly, the `buildWidgetsData()` function no longer has a `$params` argument, which must be replaced by `$this->queryParams`.

## Add proxy objects for EntityList columns and layout

The idea is to provide dedicated objects when needed to clearly indicate the API to the developer.

### `buildListDataContainers()` is renamed to `buildListFields(EntityListFieldsContainer $fieldsContainer)`

The `$fieldsContainer` parameter is a proxy object with the needed `->addField(...)` function.
As a bonus, `EntityListDataContainer` was renamed `EntityListField` for clarity.

Example: you need to refactor you code from this:

```php
function buildListDataContainers(): void
{
    $this
        ->addDataContainer(
            EntityListDataContainer::make("name")
                ->setLabel("Name")
        )
        ->addField(
            EntityListDataContainer::make("age")
                ->setLabel("Age")
        );
}
```

To this:

```php
function buildListFields(EntityListFieldsContainer $fieldsContainer): void
{
    $fieldsContainer
        ->addField(
            EntityListField::make("name")
                ->setLabel("Name")
        )
        ->addField(
            EntityListField::make("age")
                ->setLabel("Age")
        );
}
```

### `buildListLayout()` signature has changed to `buildListLayout(EntityListFieldsLayout $fieldsLayout)`

The `$fieldsLayout` parameter is a proxy object with the needed `->addColumn(...)` function.

Example: you need to refactor you code from this:

```php
function buildListLayout(): void
{
    $this->addColumn("picture", 1)
        ->addColumn("name", 2)
        ->addColumn("capacity", 2)
        ->addColumn("type:label", 2)
        ->addColumn("pilots")
        ->addColumn("messages_sent_count");
}
```

To this:

```php
function buildListLayout(EntityListFieldsLayout $fieldsLayout): void
{
    $fieldsLayout->addColumn("picture", 1)
        ->addColumn("name", 2)
        ->addColumn("capacity", 2)
        ->addColumn("type:label", 2)
        ->addColumn("pilots")
        ->addColumn("messages_sent_count");
}
```

### EntityList's `->addColumn()` no longer has optional parameter for small screens

Instead, a new optional `buildListLayoutForSmallScreens()` is available. [Refer to doc](../building-entity-list) for details.

